#### How to (re)calculate the "human footprint"

The following ingredient list stems from an educated choice of what is
available in the literature. Most papers use only small-scale,
low-resolution readmade rasters describing land cover / land use (LULC
herainafter) or human demography or signatures (populaiton dnesity,
built areas, road networks). In many papers (e.g Dong et al. 2020)
wildlife is often cited but never considered in the calculations.
Furthermore, all the rasters mentironed above are 'summed up' in a
standard map algebra exercise, assigning an (arbitrary) rank to each
coverage in order to achieve a plausible final score. Finally, dealing
with an evidence-based approach, no *a posteriori* check of the
footprint maps created is made[^1].

[^1] A thorough literature analysis shoud be made here.

#### Requisites

Reinventing the wheel just because we want it a different color is
useless, so, of the spatial resolution needed is about 1000 m the
publicly available dataset by Venter et al. (2016) is perfect, just use
that.

The dataset we need to produce should have the following requisites:

-   coverage as plantewide as possible, **or**
-   based on easily available layers, so that it can be (re)calculated
    everywhere
-   spatial resolution no more than 250 m (i.e MODIS-friendly),
    preferred 30 m (i.e. landsat-friendly), eim at 10 m (sentinel-2)

#### Ingredients

As per Sanderson et al. (2002), the basic recipe calls for four
different proxies for human influence (see list below): population
density, land transformation, accessibility, and electrical power
nfrastructure. Note the total lack of natural elements such as pristine
areas, forests, etc.

Basic datasets are:

-   :heavy_check_mark: population density, possibly gridded

-   land cover/land transformation

    -   built up areas
    -   settlements

-   :construction: roads, railways

-   natural features such as coastline, lakes, rivers

-   electrical power infrastructure

-   biome distribution In particular, Sanderson et al. (2002, Table 1)
    resorted to 9 datasets publicly available, see
    `https://academic.oup.com/view-large/126030980`.

Also note that in most of the literature, an arbitrary scoring system is
attached to the features listed above, in order to rank a pixel on the
final footprint map.

A revised, regional scale version of the scoring system has to be
devised, too.

### Possible sources (Italy)

**Note:** it is more convenient use data at the EU scale level, so that
no harmonisation will be needed.

~~ISTAT census data, vector, by census unit
`https://www.istat.it/it/archivio/104317` This should be spatially
corrected with built up areas, see
`http://foss4g-it2018.gfoss.it/data/20_febbrario/3_archeo/Baiocchi_Lelo_Vatore_FOSS4G-IT_2018.pdf`
for an example on a small area.~~

### Possible sources (EU)

In the following paragraphs the available data sources are described
along with the basic procedure (at least at the conceptual level) to
preprocess them.

## :heavy_check_mark: Human population pressure

Gallego F.J., (2010) people per cell, 100 m resolution,
`http://cmshare.eea.europa.eu/s/NAPoXyePo4J3o5X/download`. Description
at `https://data.europa.eu/euodp/en/data/dataset/jrc-ghsl-ghs_pop_eurostat_europe_r2016a/resource/46f53786-71f5-41da-ab62-f8c9dc7f0d1b`
This dataset is indeed "ready-made", possibly it will be resampled (but not downscaled) at 30 or 10 m.

## Road network

~~-   EuroGeographic (one of the official European GIS data provider)
    released as an opendata product the EuroGlobalMap dataset:
    `https://eurogeographics.org/maps-for-europe/open-data/topographic-data/`~~
-   OpenStreetmap requires preprocessing but perhaps is the finest
    high-resolution coverage possible. Nightly OpenStreetMap Europe
    snapshots available on GeoFabrik
    `http://download.geofabrik.de/osm/`, see [`doc/OSM_queries.Rmd`] for
    inspiration on how to query. Warning: we're in the tenths of GB size
    region. 
    There's an howto by Konstantin Klemmer on [`r-spatial.org`]{https://www.r-spatial.org/2017/07/14/large_scale_osm_in_r) that is worth trying.

## Railways network

As well, from OSM/GeFabrik (see above).

## Land cover / Land use

CORINE Level IV

## Power lines

Power lines? Do they exist?

## Other anthropogenic signatures

These could be tested, but look line just points that need to be
interpolated PM10 concentration
`https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/annual-mean-pm10-concentrations-in-3`
PM2.5 concentration
<https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/figures/annual-mean-pm2-5-concentrations-6>

Something for night lights?

(To be completed)

#### Methods

(define a procedure to have not-so-arbitrary raknings, or borrow and
refine already published rankings)

#### References

Dong J, Peng J, Liu Y, Qiu S, Han Y, 2020 Integrating spatial continuous
wavelet transform and jernel density estimation to identify ecologivcal
corridors in megacities. Landscape and Urban Planning 199: 103815.
<doi:10.1016/j.landurbanplan.2020.103815>

Gallego FJ, 2010. A population density grid of the European Union.
Population and Environment 31: 460â€“473. <doi:10.1007/s11111-010-0108-y>

Sanderson EW, Jaiteh M, Levy MA, Redford KH, Wannebo AV, Woolmer G,
2002. The Human Footprint and the Last of the Wild: The human footprint
is a global map of human influence on the land surface, which suggests
that human beings are stewards of nature, whether we like it or not,
BioScience 52(10): 891-904.
[doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2002)052[0891:THFATL]2.0.CO;2](doi:10.1641/0006-3568(2002)052%5B0891:THFATL%5D2.0.CO;2)

Venter O, Sanderson EW, Magrach A, Allan JR, Beher J, Jones KR,
Possingham HP, Laurance WF, Wood P, Fekete BM, Levy MA, Watson JEM,2016.
Global terrestrial Human Footprint maps for 1993 and 2009. Scientific
Data 3(1): 160067. <doi:10.1038/sdata.2016.67>
